Colonization I Market Price Movement Models
-------------------------------------------

There appear to be two market models (governing price movement)
in the original game: one for the four processed goods (rum, cig-
ars, cloth, coats), and one for the remainder. The former we will
refer to as the "price group" model and the latter the "default
model."

The default model used here along with the associated configura-
tion parameters are essentially taken/inferred from the original
game's NAMES.TXT file in the section titled "Cargo types & eco-
nomic model" together with some in-game experimentation and save
file analysis.

In both models, there are four static parameters and three dy-
namic quantities that are relevant for determining current prices
and price movement:

  Static Parameters:

    1. Rise
    2. Fall
    3. Attrition
    4. Volatility
    5. Attrition Bonus (not documented in NAMES.TXT)

  Dynamic Parameters:

    1. Current price
    2. Net total traded volume
    3. Per-player intrinsic volume
    4. Shared intrinsic volume

Most of these parameters and quantities have a different meanings
and roles depending on the price model in question. The exception
is the "current price," which simply represents the current price
of the commodity as seen by the player. The meanings of the other
parameters will be described below in the context of each partic-
ular model.

Default Model
=============

Per-player intrinsic volume:

  This is a volume-like quantity that is maintained internally
  and is not directly visible to the player. In the default price
  model, it gets added to/subtracted from after each sell/buy,
  and drifts once per turn. Whenever any nation buys/sells, a
  certain amount will be added to this intrinsic volume of all
  nations, possibly modified by various multipliers that depend
  on difficulty level, nation, and player/AI status.

  When the price is stable, the intrinsic volume is around zero.
  When the intrinsic volume exceeds the fall threshold (in the
  positive direction) then the price is lowered by one and said
  threshold is subtracted from the intrinsic volume (and simi-
  larly for rises with the opposite sign). Even if the price
  cannot change any further, the rise/fall is still added/sub-
  tracted from the volume each turn if it is in excess of those.

  At the start of each turn, the attrition value for each com-
  modity is added to this volume, and this is done before any po-
  tential price changes are evaluated. If there is an attrition
  bonus, that is added in as well (see the section on Attrition).

Shared intrinsic volume:

  This quantity is not used in the default model.

Net total traded volume:

  This quantity is not used in the default model.

Rise/Fall:

  This is the amount by which the net volume must decrease (in-
  crease) in order for the price to go up (down) by one. In the
  original game's config file these were in multiples of 100,
  but here they are not. Note that when using these volumes to
  compute price changes, the volume will be scaled up or down
  first depending on difficulty level in such a way as to make
  prices less (more) volatile on easier (harder) difficulty
  levels.

Attrition (+ Attrition Bonus):

  This is the amount added to the intrinsic volume each turn to
  allow the price to drift. If this is negative (positive) then
  the price will tend to increase (decrease) when nothing is
  traded. The actual attrition value will be scaled when playing
  as the dutch; but note that the attrition does not receive the
  usual bonus that the dutch get on reduced selling volumes.

  The Attrition Bonus is not represented in NAMES.TXT, but is ap-
  plied for sugar, cotton, tobacco, and furs. If the attrition
  bonus is enabled then the existing attrition gets modified ac-
  cording to this formula:

    attrition_old = attrition_new - (rise*fall/2)

  and this is scaled when playing the dutch as well.

  This is the only known property that distinguishes them from
  the other (non-price group) commodities. Perhaps this more sim-
  plified (relative to a real price group) group behavior is what
  the OSG is referring to when it says that those commodities
  from a group.

Volatility:

  The original game's config file describes this field as the
  "shift value for traffic volume." Experiments indicate that it
  literally represents the number of times to left shift (i.e.,
  bit shift) a quantity. In the default price model, it is used
  to bit shift the traded amount before adding it onto the in-
  trinsic volume. So e.g., a value of 2 for this field would mean
  that, if the player sells 50 of a commodity, then 50<<2 = 50*4
  = 200 will actually be added (since it is a sell) to the in-
  trinsic volume. This makes the price more responsive to traffic
  (more volatile in that sense). Note that in the price group
  model it plays a different role.

Modifiers:

  Dutch: the dutch get their traffic volumes changes scaled down
  when selling (by any player) and their attrition magnitude
  scaled up when computing price changes. This puts things more
  in their favor in both situations.

  Difficulty level: depending on the difficulty level, the
  traffic volume (i.e., explicitly traded by the player) gets
  scaled up or down to make price swings more/less pronounced.

  Note on ordering of the application of bonuses and modifiers:
  Although there are various bonuses/penalties involved in the
  default model, but what's nice is that they are all multiplica-
  tive (even the volatility "shift"), and so it does not matter
  in what order they are applied.

Coupling of Markets:

  As mentioned above, in the default model, the way that one
  player's activity influences the others' markets is that when a
  player buys/sells, that volume (potentially scaled in some way)
  is added also to the other player's intrinsic volumes.

Price Group Model
=================

This model is quite different from the default model.

The OG's strategy guide mentions that some sets of commodities
form groups, where one price change in one affects the others in
the opposite direction. In particular, the OG puts rum, cigars,
cloth, and coats into such a group. Note that it also puts sugar,
tobacco, cotton, and fur in a group, but experiments on the orig-
inal game suggest that they are not actually in a group.

The precise workings of the model are best understood by just
looking at this game's implementation, but we will just give an
overview here.

Generally speaking, it seems that the goal of the designers of
the original game were to encourage the selling of all four of
the goods instead of just a single one repeatedly. To this end,
no matter how much you sell, the prices will not drop as long as
you sell all four goods. The fewer types of goods you sell, the
more the prices will drop. This is implemented by tying the
prices of the four goods together in such a way that when one
goes down, the others go up. The game roughly tries to maintain a
fixed average of the prices of the four goods.

In particular, although each commodity in a price group gets its
own intrinsic volume, and these intrinsic volumes are evolved
separate in all cases, the "magic" happens when the equilibrium
(target) prices are derived from the volumes; the algorithm for
this ensures that the (inverse) volumes determine not the prices
themselves, but the ratios of the prices, and thus the game can
impose a desired average price and find a set of prices that have
the specified ratios while roughly meeting the target average.
This average will not always be produced exactly, but it is what
the algorithm tends toward.

Per-player intrinsic volume:

  This quantity is not used in the price-group model.

Shared intrinsic volume:

  These are a set of volume-like quantities, one per commodity,
  that are shared among all players, and are used in the price
  group model instead of the per-player intrinsic volumes.

  These volume-like quantities are maintained internally and not
  not directly visible to the player. In the price group model,
  the relevant quantity is the "total" volume, defined as the in-
  trinsic volume plus the sum of the net traded values for all
  players. These total volumes, for each commodity, specify the
  ratios of the equilibrium prices with each other; specifically,
  the ratios of the inverses of the total volumes specify the ra-
  tios of the equilibrium prices (modulo some technicalities). As
  a result, the game must specify a target average price value
  for these commodities to normalize them, and in the OG it is
  ask=12.

  These intrinsic volumes evolve by first adding them to the ac-
  tual players-summed traded volume to get the total volume, then
  scaling down by 1%, then again removing the player traded vol-
  ume. This effectively allows these intrinsic volumes to evolve
  in such a way as to make the "total" traded volume decrease by
  1% each turn. It is a bit hard to intuit what consequences this
  will have, if any, since scaling them all down uniformly does
  not change their ratios and thus does not change the prices.
  When a buy/sell is made, the quantity transacted gets added not
  to the intrinsic volume, but to the actual volume. But, in con-
  trast to the default model, it does not get added to the other
  player's volumes since there is no need to do that, since when
  we evolve or evaluate the price group model, we use the sum of
  all player's traded volumes.

  The are some minor technical details by which the actual algo-
  rithm slightly deviates from the above, but the above is basi-
  cally the way it works.

Net total traded volume:

  This quantity represents the sum of all players' net traded
  amounts of a commodity. So e.g. if hitherto in the game the
  English net sold 200 ore, the French net bought 100 ore, the
  Spanish net sold none, and the Dutch net sold 400, then this
  quantity will be 200-100+400=500. The reason that the sum of
  all four are used is because the intrinsic volume used in the
  model are the global ones shared by all players; hence the fact
  that we are summing the traded volumes is the way in which the
  four markets affect each other in the price group model.

Rise/Fall/Volatility:

  These are used in a different way from the default model. In
  particular, whenever the player makes a trade, the volumes are
  NOT affected by these; instead, after the volumes are adjusted,
  the current price is also bumped, and it is bumped by an amount
  proporational to (rise/(1<<volatility)), and equivalently for
  falls. Again, neither the equilibrium prices nor the volumes
  are affected by this.

Attrition: Not used in this model.

Modifiers:

  Dutch: They get a different kind of bonus than in the default
  model. Here they don't get their volumes scaled down; instead,
  when the make a transaction in europe, although the price is
  recomputed on the spot as usual, the intrinsic volumes are not
  also evolved in the process, which happens to move things more
  in their favor by making prices slightly less volatile.

  Difficulty level: there doesn't seem to be any different in the
  price group model by difficulty level.

Coupling of Markets:

  In contrast to the default model, in the price group model, the
  way that one player's activity influences the others' markets
  is that 1) all players share one set of intrinsic volumes, and
  2) when the price group model is evolved or evaluated, we use
  as the traded volume the sum of all of the player's volumes.